---
title: Use cases for DDoS Open Threat Signaling
abbrev: DOTS Use Cases
docname: draft-ietf-dots-use-cases-10
date: 2017-03-27

area: Security
wg: DOTS
kw: Internet-Draft
cat: info

coding: us-ascii
pi:
  rfcedstyle: yes
  toc: yes
  tocindent: yes
  sortrefs: yes
  symrefs: yes
  strict: yes
  comments: yes
  inline: yes
  docmapping: yes

author:
      -
        ins: R. Dobbins
        name: Roland Dobbins
        org: Arbor Networks
        street:
        -
        city:
        -
        code:
        -
        country: Singapore
        email: rdobbins@arbor.net
      -
        ins: D. Migault
        name: Daniel Migault
        org: Ericsson
        street: 8400 boulevard Decarie
        city: Montreal, QC
        code: H4P 2N2
        country: Canada
        email: daniel.migault@ericsson.com
      -
        ins: S. Fouant
        name: Stefan Fouant
        org:
        -
        street:
        -
        city:
        -
        code:
        -
        country: USA
        email: stefan.fouant@copperriverit.com
      -
        ins: R. Moskowitz
        name: Robert Moskowitz
        org: HTT Consulting
        street:
        -
        city: Oak Park, MI
        code: 48237
        country: USA
        email: rgm@labs.htt-consult.com
      -
        ins: N. Teague
        name: Nik Teague
        org: Verisign
        street: 12061 Bluemont Way
        city: Reston, VA
        code: 20190
        email: nteague@verisign.com
      -
        ins: L. Xia
        name: Liang Xia
        org: Huawei
        street: No. 101, Software Avenue, Yuhuatai District
        city: Nanjing
        country: China
        email: Frank.xialiang@huawei.com
      -
        ins: K. Nishizuka
        name: Kaname Nishizuka
        org: NTT Communications
        street: GranPark 16F 3-4-1 Shibaura, Minato-ku
        city: Tokyo
        code: 108-8118
        country: Japan
        email: kaname@nttv6.jp

normative:
  RFC2119:

informative:
  RFC6335:
  RFC7368:
  I-D.ietf-dots-requirements:
  APACHE:
    target: https://www.modsecurity.org
    title: Apache mod_security
  RRL:
    target: https://deepthought.isc.org/article/AA-00994/0/Using-the-Response-Rate-Limiting-Feature-in-BIND-9.10.html
    title: BIND RRL
    date: 2014-08-06


--- abstract

The DDoS Open Threat Signaling (DOTS) effort is intended to provide a
protocol to facilitate interoperability between multivendor DDoS
mitigation solutions and services.  This document presents use cases
which describe the interactions expected between the DOTS components
as well as DOTS messaging exchanges.  The purpose of describing use
cases is to identify the interacting DOTS components, how they
collaborate and what are the types of information to be exchanged.

--- middle

Introduction {#introduction}
============

Currently, distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack mitigation
solutions are largely based upon siloed, proprietary communications
schemes which result in vendor lock-in.  As a side-effect, this makes
the configuration, provisioning, operation, and activation of these

solutions a highly manual and often time-consuming process.
Additionally, coordination of multiple DDoS mitigation solutions
simultaneously engaged in defending the same organization (resources)
against DDoS attacks is fraught with both technical and process-
related hurdles.  This greatly increase operational complexity and
often results in suboptimal DDoS attack mitigation efficacy.

The DDoS Open Threat Signaling (DOTS) effort is intended to specify a
protocol that facilitates interoperability between multivendor DDoS
mitigation solutions and ensures more automation in term of
mitigation requests and attack characterization patterns.  As DDoS
solutions are broadly heterogeneous among vendors, the primary goal
of DOTS is to provide high-level interaction amongst differeing DDoS
solutions, such as initiating or terminating DDoS mitigation
assistance.

It should be noted that DOTS is not intended toperform orchestration
functions; rather, DOTS is intended to allowdevices, services, and
applications to request DDoS attack mitigation assistance and receive
mitigation status updates.

These use cases are expected to provide inputs for the design of the
DOTS protocol(s).


Terminology and Acronyms {#terminology-and-acronyms}
========================


Requirements Terminology {#requirements-terminology}
------------------------

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


Acronyms {#acronyms}
--------

This document makes use of the same terminology and definitions as
[I-D.ietf-dots-requirements], except where noted.


Use Cases {#use-cases}
===================

End-customer with an overlay DDoS mitigation managed security service provider {#use-case-1}
----------------------

This is a more complex use-case involving multiple DDoS MSSPs,
whether transit operators, overlay MSSPs, or both.  In this scenario,
an MSSP has entered into a pre-arranged DDoS mitigation assistance
agreement with one or more other DDoS MSSPs in order to ensure that
sufficient DDoS mitigation capacity and/or capabilities may be
activated in the event that a given DDoS attack threatens to
overwhelm the ability of a given DDoS MSSP to mitigate the attack on
its own.

BGP-based diversion (including relevant Letters of Authorization, or
LoAs), DNS-based diversion (including relevant LoAs), traffic re-
injection mechanisms such as Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE)
tunnels, provisioning of DDoS orchestration systems, et. al,. must be
arranged in advance between the DDoS MSSPs which are parties to the
agreement.  They should also be tested on a regular basis.

When a DDoS MSSP which is party to the agreement is nearing its
capacity or ability to mitigate a given DDoS attack traffic, the DOTS
client integrated with the MSSP DDoS mitigation orchestration system
signals partner MSSPs to initiate network traffic diversion and DDoS
mitigation activities.  Ongoing attack and mitigation status messages
may be passed between the DDoS MSSPs, and between the requesting MSSP
and the ultimate end-customer of the attack.

Once the requesting DDoS MSSP is confident that the DDoS attack has
either ceased or has fallen to levels of traffic/complexity which
they can handle on their own, the requesting DDoS MSSP DOTS client
sends mitigation termination requests to the participating overflow
DDoS MSSPs.



The following is an overview of the DOTS communication model for this
use-case:



* (a) A DDoS attack is initiated against online properties of an
organization which has deployed a DOTS-client-capable IDMS.
* (b) The IDMS detects, classifies, and begins mitigating the DDoS
attack. 
* (c) The IDMS determines that its capacity and/or capability to
mitigate the DDoS attack is insufficient, and utilize its DOTS client
functionality to send a DOTS mitigation service initiation request to
one or more DOTS servers residing on the upstream transit networks.
This DOTS mitigation service initiation request is automatically
initiated by the DOTS client.

* (d) The DOTS servers which receive the DOTS mitigation service
initiation requests determine that they have been configured to honor
requests from the requesting DOTS client, and initiate situationally-
appropriate DDoS mitigation service.

* (f) While DDoS mitigation services are active, the DOTS servers
regularly transmit DOTS mitigation status updates to the DOTS client. 

* (j) The DOTS client transmits a DOTS mitigation service termination
request to the DOTS server.

* (k) The DOTS server terminates DDoS mitigation service.

 
 

Upstream Transit Providers Offering DDoS Mitigation Services {#use-case-2}
----------------------

This use case is very similar to the one in section {use-case-1}
except that the DDoS mitigation Service is collocated with the upstream
ISP. Such collocation eases the different settings as the ISP is well
aware of the connectivity information of the enterprise network it
provides connectivity to. In addition, the upstream provider may also
detect when the DDoS attack is ongoing and inform the network entreprise
with updates, which avoids a detection system being set on the network
entreprise. On the other hand, for network enterprise that
are multihomed with different ISPs, the handling of DDoS attacks on
multiple links comes with an additional overhead.     

In this scenario, an enterprise network with self-hosted Internet-
facing properties such as Web servers, authoritative DNS servers, and
VoIP PBXes has an intelligent DDoS mitigation system (IDMS) deployed
to protect those servers and applications from DDoS attacks.  In
addition to their on-premise DDoS defense capability, they have
contracted with their Internet transit provider for DDoS mitigation
services which threaten to overwhelm their transit link bandwidth.

The IDMS is configured such that if the incoming Internet traffic
volume exceeds 50% of the provisioned upstream Internet transit link
capacity, the IDMS will request DDoS mitigation assistance from the
upstream transit provider.

The requests to trigger, manage, and finalize a DDoS mitigation
between the enterprise IDMS and the transit provider is performed
using DOTS.  The enterprise IDMS implements a DOTS client while the
transit provider implements a DOTS server which is integrated with
their DDoS mitigation orchestration system.

When the IDMS detects an inbound DDoS attack targeting the enterprise
servers and applications, it immediately begins mitigating the
attack.

During the course of the attack, the inbound traffic volume exceeds
the 50% threshold; the IDMS DOTS client signals the DOTS server on
the upstream transit provider network to initiate DDoS mitigation.
The DOTS server signals the DOTS client that it can service this
request, and mitigation is initiated on the transit provider network.

Over the course of the attack, the DOTS server on the transit
provider network periodically signals the DOTS client on the
enterprise IDMS in order to provide mitigation status information,
statistics related to DDoS attack traffic mitigation, and related
information.  Once the DDoS attack has ended, the DOTS server signals
the enterprise IDMS DOTS client that the attack has subsided.

The enterprise IDMS then requests that DDoS mitigation services on
the upstream transit provider network be terminated.  The DOTS server
on the transit provider network receives this request, communicates
with the transit provider orchestration system controlling its DDoS
mitigation system to terminate attack mitigation, and once the
mitigation has ended, confirms the end of upstream DDoS mitigation
service to the enterprise IDMS DOTS client.

Note that communications between the enterprise DOTS client and the
upstream transit provider DOTS server may take place in-band within
the main Internet transit link between the enterprise and the transit
provider; out-of-band via a separate, dedicated wireline network link
utilized solely for DOTS signaling; or out-of-band via some other
form of network connectivity such as a third-party wireless 4G
network link.

DDoS Orchestration {#use-case-3}
----------------------
 
In this use case, one or more DDoS telemetry systems or monitoring
devices such as a flow telemetry collector monitor a network --
typically an ISP network.  Upon detection of a DDoS attack, these
telemetry systems alert an orchestrator in charge of coordinating the
various DDoS mitigation systems within the domain.  The telemetry
systems may be configured to provide necessary and useful pieces of
information, such as a preliminary analysis of the observation to the
orchestrator.

The orchestrator analyses the various information it receives from
specialized equipement, and elaborates one or multiple DDoS
mitigation strategies.  In some case, a manual confirmation may also
be required to choose a proposed strategy or to initiate a DDoS
mitigation.  The DDoS mitigation may consist of multiple steps such
as configuring the network, various hardware, or updating already
instantiated DDoS mitigation functions.  In some cases, some specific
virtual DDoS mitigation functions must be instantiated and properly
ordered.  Eventually, the coordination of the mitigation may involve
external DDoS resources such as a transit provider or an MSSP.

The communications used to trigger a DDoS mitigation between the
telemetry and monitoring systems and the orchestrator is performed
using DOTS.  The telemetry systems implements a DOTS client while the
orchestrator implements a DOTS server.

The communication between a network administrator and the
orchestrator is also performed using DOTS.  The network administrator
via its web interfaces implements a DOTS client, while the
Orchestrator implements a DOTS server.

The communication between the Orchestrator and the DDoS mitigation
systems is performed using DOTS.  The Orchestrator implements a DOTS
client while the DDoS mitigation systems implement a DOTS server.

The configuration aspects of each DDoS mitigation system, as well as
the instantiations of DDoS mitigation functions or network
configuration is not part of DOTS.  Similarly, the discovery of
available DDoS mitigation functions is not part of DOTS.


           +----------+
           | network  |C
           | adminis  |<-+
           | trator   |  |
           +----------+  |
                         |                       (internal)
           +----------+  | S+--------------+     +-----------+
           |telemetry/|  +->|              |C   S| DDoS      |+
           |monitoring|<--->| Orchestrator |<--->| mitigation||
           |systems   |C   S|              |<-+  | systems   ||
           +----------+     +--------------+C |  +-----------+|
                                              |    +----------+
                                              |
                                              |  (external)
                                              |  +-----------+
                                              | S| DDoS      |
                                              +->| mitigation|
                                                 | systems   |
                                                 +-----------+
           * C is for DOTS client functionality
           * S is for DOTS server functionality

   Figure 1: DDoS Orchestration



The telemetry systems monitor various traffic network and perform
their measurement tasks.  They are configured so that when an event
or some measurements reach a predefined level to report a DOTS
mitigation request to the Orchestrator.  The DOTS mitigation request
may be associated with some element such as specific reporting.

Upon receipt of the DOTS mitigation request from the telemetry
system, the Orchestrator responds with an acknowledgement, to avoid
retransmission of the request for mitigation.  The status of the DDoS
mitigation indicates the Orchestrator is in an analysing phase.  The
Orchestrator begins collecting various information from various
telemetry systems in order to correlate the measurements and provide
an analysis of the event.  Eventually, the Orchestrator may ask
additional information to the telemetry system, however, the
collection of these information is performed outside DOTS.

The orchestrator may be configured to start a DDoS mitigation upon
approval from a network administrator.  The analysis from the
orchestrator is reported to the network administrator via a web
interface.  If the network administrator decides to start the
mitigation, she orders through her web interface a DOTS client to
send a request for DDoS mitigation.  This request is expected to be
associated with a context that identifies the DDoS mitigation
selected.

Upon receiving the DOTS request for DDoS mitigation from the network
administrator, the orchestrator orchestrates the DDoS mitigation
according to the specified strategy.  Its status indicates the DDoS
mitigation is starting while not effective.

Orchestration of the DDoS mitigation systems works similarly as
described in Section XXX. The Orchestrator
indicates with its status whether the DDoS Mitigation is effective.

When the DDoS mitigation is finished on the DDoS mitigation systems,
the orchestrator indicates to the Telemetry systems as well as to the
network administrator the DDoS mitigation is finished.



Security Considerations {#security-considerations}
=======================

DOTS is at risk from three primary attacks: DOTS agent impersonation, traffic
injection, and signaling blocking.  The DOTS protocol MUST be designed for
minimal data transfer to address the blocking risk.

Impersonation and traffic injection mitigation can be managed through current
secure communications best practices.  DOTS is not subject to anything new in
this area.  One consideration could be to minimize the security technologies in
use at any one time.  The more needed, the greater the risk of failures coming
from assumptions on one technology providing protection that it does not in the
presence of another technology.

Additional details of DOTS security requirements may be found in
[I-D.ietf-dots-requirements].


IANA Considerations
===================

No IANA considerations exist for this document at this time.


Acknowledgments
===============

The authors would like to thank among others Tirumaleswar Reddy;
Andrew Mortensen; Mohamed Boucadaire; Artyom Gavrichenkov; and the
DOTS WG chairs, Roman D.  Danyliw and Tobias Gondrom, for their
valuable feedback.
